So let's now have a bit of
a discussion about binary.
What it is, and
how you can actually use it.
So binary is actually a number
system just like decimal but
whereas decimal is based on ten and
uses the digits zero to nine binary
is actually based on two and so therefore
can only use the digits zero to one.
So I'm just gonna show this
little table on the screen.
And in decimal,
we're actually very familiar with
the idea that the position of
a digit represents its value.
So you may remember doing hundreds.
Tens and
units in school to get used to that idea.
So if we enter the digits into columns
as you can see on the screen we
can see that the column values
are just powers of ten.
So with the first column
representing 10 to the power of 0,
anything to the power of 0 is 1.
In the second column is
10 to the power of 1.
And anything to the power
of 1 is itself and so on.
So 10 squared, 10 cubed, etc.
So, thus the 9 in the second column
as you can see on the screen were 90,
and the 9 in the third
column is worth 900.
So it's easy to see that the maximum
number we can represent with four digits
then is 9999,
as you can see on the screen And
if we need to store 10,000,
then we have to go into a fifth column.
So binary, as it turns out,
works in exactly the same way.
But because it's working in
base two rather than base ten,
the column headings are powers of two,
they're not powers of ten.
So as you can see in this screen,
in binary each binary digit or
bit is worth the power of 2,
and it's corresponding to the column that
it's in, just like in the decimal system.
So 1 in the first column is still worth 1.
In the next column it is worth 2,
and so on.
And as you can see from the slide,
a byte where all the bits
are 0 holds the value 0.
If the first bit is one,
then the value is one.
So, as an example to represent decimal 47,
we need 32 plus 8 which gives us 40
plus 4 which gives us a total of 44, and
We need two, which gives us a total of 46,
and then plus one, to give it 47.
So in binary,
the decimal value of 47 is 00101111,
as you can see on the screen there.
If every one of the first 8 bits is one.
Now what we actually have is 128
plus 64 plus so on so forth.
So it's easy in this case
to look at the next column
because we can actually
have one less than it.
Or there is 255.
Now when we actually add 1 to 255
the number in the first column becomes 2.
So we enter 0 and we actually carry 1.
And on the next slide you can see that the
number in the next column then becomes 2.
So again we enter 0 and
carry the 1 and so on.
Once we reach the eighth bit
what we do is set that to 0.
And we have to move into another part.
Now unlike a decimal where we don't have
the concept of restricting the number of
digits because we're not really trying to
store decimal numbers in a computer or
such, binary doesn't have that Or
binary has a problem or has a restriction.
Because binary,
we actually have the concept of eight bits
making a byte, by a eighth, hence byte.
And because we're actually storing binary
numbers in physical computer hardware,
a decision had to be made early on for
example As to how many transistors
at the hyper level would be
used in each memory location.
So the number they
eventually choose was 8.
And as a result,
when dealing with binary numbers,
we have to consider a digit
moving into the next byte.
But it's nothing really more than starting
a new column like we did in decimal
when we added 1 to 9999.
It also turns out it's actually very easy
to display numbers in binary in Python.
So I'm just gonna switch over
to my Intellijay, IDE, and
we're just gonna type a bit of code in.
As I mentioned it's very easy to
display numbers in binary in Python.
Now we covered formatting strings and
using replacement fields,
the one thing we haven't mentioned is that
you can add a number base to the format To
display a number in binary hexadecimal or
octal which we'll look at shortly.
So, the following program I'm about to type
in will display the numbers from 0
to 16 in binary.
So we can type for i,
in range, 17, and then
print Is a replacement field zero column
greater than two in
is, and then we can top zero on the
replacement field greater than O eight B.
In closing off the field, top format I.
And, I made an arrow there
at the start of this line.
However I can fix that or
close off the replacement field.
So what we're doing is we're
showing the decimal equivalent
of the field with the 2, and we're right
align, right aligning to the value of i,
then we're specifying a of 8.
Over here the, the binary right align and
adding beta with the value of i in binary.
So if we actually run that You can
see we're getting the right result.
Zero in binary is 0000 one in binary is
and so on and so forth, as per the slides.
So looking at the pattern of the binary
numbers from 0 to 16 is a good
way to understand how binary numbers work.
What I'm talking about is we can
see the one moving across here.
So we've got the value zero which is
gonna be all zeroes, one has got the bit
right most bit set and notice when we
move to two the next bit gets set and
then three the two is set, four we've got
the next bit set and so on and so forth.
You can also extend the range to
print out high binary numbers so
experiment with this and get a feel for
how the binary numbers increase as you add
one to it and
that will really help you understand.
The conversions that
are actually happening when
you're converting from decimal to binary.
Now subtraction actually works
the same as it does in decimal, so
I'm going to move back to the next slide.
So as I mentioned subtraction also works
Works the same as it does in decimal.
If there's not a number big
enough in the current column
then you can actually borrow
from the next column.
Now you'll be glad to know that we're
not going to look at multiplication and
division here.
If you were to perform multiplication or
division long hand the process is
identical to what you would do in decimal,
although you'd actually tend to have
many more digits to deal with in
binary just because we're dealing
with a base-2 number system.
So this next slide shows seven,
which in binary is one,
one, one as you can see
on the screen there.
And it shows up being multiplied
by three or one, one in binary.
And it shows you that long hand if
you want to experiment with it,
but you really don't have to perform
arithmetic like this on binary numbers
That's what we've got computers for.
It's just good to have a sort
of basic understanding of this
without necessarily needing to know or
to know it in detail.
Now there's a few more operations
that can be performed on
binary numbers that are beyond the basic
arithmetic that we're used to and
understanding those can
actually be useful.
So I'm just gonna move
to the next slide Now
this slide shows what happens when
you shift a binary number left.
So just like a decimal when
you want to multiply by ten,
you insert a zero at the end
of the Of the number.
In binary the same thing,
multiplies by two instead of ten.
So shifting right divides by two just
like it divides by ten in decimal.
And as it turns out, you can have
a binary point in binary as well.
So 11 or 1011,
as you can see on the screen there,
Shift right would become 101.1
which is 5.5 in decimal.
Now the final three operations we want
to look at briefly are going to be or,
and, and xall, which is short for
exclusive all.
The first thing or.
So the binary or operation checks
each bid and its two upper hands.
And for each bid it actually sets
the bid in the result to one
if either of the upper hands
had a one in that position.
And probably the next lab will
help you understand that.
So this slide actually shows 4 or
8 giving 12 and then 12 or 11 giving 15.
So that's how OR actually works.
The next one, the AND operation,
This sets each bit of the result to one,
if the corresponding bit
in both upper hands is one.
So let's have a look at
that in the next slide.
So as you can see here, 12 and eight is
eight because there's only one position
that's got both a one, or that has a one
in both 12 and eight as you can see there.
So eight and seven is zero, as no
positions contain a one in both numbers.
And just moving on to the final slide,
this is Exclusive OR, or XOR.
And with this one,
XOR sets the corresponding bit of
the result to one if either but not
both of the upper ANDs has a one in that
position as you can see in this slide.
Now, XOR is useful because
if you repeat the operation,
you get the original number back.
Now we'll move on to the next slide.
So in this one you can actually see 12
XOR eight is four or equals four and
four XOR eight is equal to 12.
Now this has got useful applications
in cryptography, for example.
And was also used to draw the cursor
on early monochrome screens.
By XORing each row of a character's eight
bit representation on the screen The image
would actually be inverted to represent
the cursor being on that character.
So XOR again restores the character.
Now moving on to the last slide.
This actually shows you a much
smaller four by five character
XOR in each row with one one one one.
And you can sort of see
what happened there.
Now that's really all you need to
know about binary at this stage,
we're not really going to perform
binary arithmetic manually
Because we've got computers to do that.
But, that said understanding
how numbers are stored
inside the computer is actually
very useful especially when we have
to consider how many bytes we have
to allocate for storing our data.
Now it also explains why, for
example ASCII cannot be used to represent
all the characters that are used in
the various languages around the world as
ASCII characters must fit into one byte.
Now Unicode resolves this by using two or
four bytes per character and
allowing many more characters
to be represented.
Now if some of that or all of that didn't
make a great deal of sense, don't worry.
It's useful to understand what's
going on inside the computer
But is not actually essential and
the remainder of this course
does not require you to actually
understand the binary number system.
So that's it,
I'm going to finish the video here.
In the next video we're going to start
looking at hexidecimal and octal.
So see you in the next video.